---
layout: post
title: Tutorial 2 - If Statement
---
Welcome back! In this tutorial we will learn one of the most fundamental facet of programming, namely to be able to manipulate the flow of a program. Indeed, control flow is the staple of the programming world. It allows us to make a computer _thinks_ for itself.

## Sequential Execution
Javascript, and in any other languages, there is a sense of "linearity" in which the program is executed. It is roughly speaking, from top to bottom, one line at a time. It feels like following a cooking recipe. Think of it like the gravitational force in programming.
However, by using control flow constructs, we can "disrupt the flow" of this linearity, and make the code execution jumps to places we want, back or forth.

> Technical note: In Javascript, we call anything that is terminated by `;` a **statement**. A set of statements enclosed by the curly braces `{` and `}` is called a **block statement**.

## Two-way branching, aka if-then-else
This will be one of your most powerful tool in programming, and you will use it everyday. Let's start with an example: ensuring that a user that enters your site is not underage.

{% highlight javascript %}
var age = 18;
if (age >= 21) {
  console.log("You may enter.");
} else {
  console.log("Sorry, you are underaged.");
}
{% endhighlight %}

Here, the execution of the code branches into 2 paths. If `age` is bigger than or equal to 21, then it prints "You may enter.". Otherwise, if `age` is less than 21, as in this example, it jumps to the second code block and prints "Sorry, you are underaged." instead.

In general the form is as follows:

{% highlight javascript %}
if (test) {
  // statements to execute if test is true
} else {
  // statements to execute if test is false
}
{% endhighlight %}

There is no restriction in what kind of statements you can put in each block. It can even be nested if. Here is an example which welcomes you if you are of a certain nationality and name.

{% highlight javascript %}
var nationality = "Indonesian";
var name = "Cinko";
if (nationality == "Indonesian") {
  if (name == "Cinko") {
    console.log("Welcome, Cinko of Indonesia!");
  } else {
    console.log("Sorry, you are not Cinko, although you are Indonesian.");
  }
} else {
  console.log("Sorry, you are not Indonesian.");
}
{% endhighlight %}

Here you see that we can nest if-then statement to perform a more elaborate logical branching. The possibility is limitless.

## If statement (without else counterpart)
We can also write a simpler `if` statement without `else`. For example:

{% highlight javascript %}
var name = "John";
if (name == "John") {
  console.log("Well, if it isn't John!");
}
console.log("Welcome!");
{% endhighlight %}

The above construct is useful when we want to perform an optional action only when a certain condition is met. Here, we use `if` statement to treat user 'John' more exclusively than the other users.

## N-way branching, aka if-else if-else
Finally, the most general way of branching is by the use of `else if`. For example:

{% highlight javascript %}
var nationality = "German";
if (nationality == "American") {
  console.log("You have presidential election every 4 years.");
} else if (nationality == "German") {
  console.log("Your Chancellor is a highly intellectual lady.");
} else if (nationality == "Singaporean") {
  console.log("You are lead by a Prime Minister");
} else {
  console.log("Tell me more about the political system in your country!");
}
{% endhighlight %}

The above `if-else if-else` can be seen as a chain of `if-else` statements. The computer will go through all the `if` expressions until it find the first one that evaluates to `true` (in this case, `nationality == "German"`). It will then execute the corresponding block. It will ignore the rest of the chain. This behavior is called _short circuit logic_. Hence there is a stark difference between:

{% highlight javascript %}
var x = 3;
if (x < 4) {
  console.log("x is less than 4");
}
if (x < 5) {
  console.log("x is less than 5");
}
{% endhighlight %}

And this:

{% highlight javascript %}
var x = 3;
if (x < 4) {
  console.log("x is less than 4");
} else if (x < 5) {
  console.log("x is less than 5");
}
{% endhighlight %}

Try it yourself and see if you can understand why you get those results.

As with the normal `if-else` statement, you can optionally not use the trailing `else` in the chain if you need to, as shown above.


### 2.1 Logical Test
At this point, I think it is a good time to introduce what are the things that we can test, and the operators that can be used. You have seen `==` which tests for equality. We will briefly revisit it, and go through the rest of the operators.

Logical operators always returns a boolean value, which is either `true` or `false`.

> Open up your console log and follow along the discussion! Experiment with your own examples.

#### 2.1.1 Equality operator ==
With this operator we can check if two strings are the same, two integers are equal, and so on. Note however, that the notion of `double` equality comparison does not exist.

{% highlight javascript %}
"H" == "h";  // false.
"H" == "H";  // true.
"Tyrion" == "Tyrion";  // true.

// Arithmetic comparisons.
4 == 1 + 3; // true.
2 - 1 == 1; // true.
1 - 2 == 1; // false.

// String comparison cares about whitespaces.
"B" == " B"; // false.
"B" == "B";  // true.
" B " == " B "; // true.

// You can also compare boolean values!
true == false;  // false.
true == true;  // true.
{% endhighlight %}

However, take note of this quirk. Javascript sometimes tries to be clever by performing _implicit type coercion_ during equality check. For example, take a look at the following example.

{% highlight javascript %}
124 == "124";  // true.
{% endhighlight %}

Here, the left-hand side is an integer `124`, while the right-hand side is a string `"124"` which are two different types. In other languages, this type of comparison is illegal. However, Javascript will coerce (i.e. convert) the type of one into the other and returns true! This can introduce subtle bugs that hard to debug.

Because of that, there is another equality operator, called the _strict equality_ operator `===`, that does not do this kind of coercion.

{% highlight javascript %}
124 === "124";  // false.
{% endhighlight %}

As seen, `===` performs the equality check by the book, although it still allows cross-type checking that should result in error in other languages.
In general, it is favourable to use `===`, but I don't impose this rule.

#### 2.1.2 Inequality operator !=
Of course, we can also check of inequality. For new programmer, the operator `!=` might look funny. But actually `!` has more general meaning, which indicates _negation_. In fact, `!` also exists as a unary operator that negates a boolean value. We'll come to that later.

{% highlight javascript %}
"B" != "b";  // true.
"B" != "B";  // false.

1 != 0;  // true. 1 is not equal to 0.
1 != 1;  // false. 1 is NOT not equal to 1. Haha.

// Confusing huh? Read it slowly :)
true != false;  // true.
true != true;  // false.
{% endhighlight %}

Of course there is also `!==`, the _strict inequality operator_.

> Note: It's better to not mix equality and inequality operators with the _strict_ versions, as you will introduce subtle bugs. Use either `==` and `!=` exclusively, or `===` and `!==` exclusively for your learning.

#### 2.1.3 Comparison operator <, >, <=, >=.
These operators often appear in math classes and might bring back unpleasant memories. But in programming it is very useful!
- `<` means **strictly** smaller than. So `1 < 2` is true, `2 < 1` is false, and `1 < 1` is false.
- `>` means **strictly** larger than.
- `<=` means less than or equal to. So `1 <= 1` is true, `0 <= 1` is true, but `2 <= 1` is false.
- `>=` means greater than or equal to.
Note that there is not spaces between `<` and `=` in `<=`, and similarly `>=`. Also note that `=` comes after the angle bracket.
Sometimes you will mistype `>=` (greater than equal to operator) with `=>` (lambda operator) and they have **wildly** different meaning. And Javascript might not warn you at all. So be sure to be careful.

> You might think that the comparisons are only performed on numbers. However, we can alo compare two strings! For example, "abc" < "c" is true. Strings are compared based on their **lexicographical ordering**, which can be confusing at times. For example, "10" < "1" is false! (That is why when you name two files with numbers, sometimes you notice the bigger numbers appear before the smaller ones. If you are curious, you can look up what lexicographical ordering is.)

## Playground: Practice time!
Go to this [repository](https://github.com/js-basics/sources/tree/master/tutorial-02/playground-1), and copy (or download) each of the files into your computer. Make sure that the filenames are intact, and that they are placed in the same folder.

Open `main.html` and notice that the functionality is still broken. Your task is to apply what you learnt here by updating `main.js` to implement the required functionality.

You can take a look at `lib.js` and try to understand roughly what is going on.

## Conclusion
Phew! Mastery of `if-then-else` by itself can bring you far in the programming journey. Later on we will learn more advanced techniques on control flow. By the end of the series, these control flow techniques will come as a second nature to you, I promise.
