---
layout: post
title: Tutorial 0 - Setup
---
Before we start, I'll describe our workflow. This is a minimal setup that would allow us to start learning without worrying about anything else. You can think of it as a template.

## 1. Create a _.js_ file
In each tutorial, we will always start by creating a `.js` file. This is the Javascript file in which we will write our program. So for example, create a new file called `hello.js` with the following content:

```javascript
console.log("Hello World!");
```

The above code will simply prints "Hello World!" to the `console log`. `console log` a logging facility that is provided by browsers to aid programmers (us!) in testing and debugging their Javascript code. I'll tell you more about this later.

## 2. Create a _.html_ file to embed the _.js_ file
Next, we create a `.html` which will load the `.js` file. Why? You'll learn more about this later as we go along. For now, this is just a nuisance that you will have to do without thinking about it. So, for this tutorial, create a new file called `hello.html` which contains:

```html
<html>
<head>
  <script src="hello.js"></script>
</head>
</html>
```

This simply means, in this `html` page, we instruct the browser to retrieve a `.js` file as specified in the `src` attribute of the `<script>` tag, in this case `"hello.js"`.

In general, if you named your `.js` differently such as `blah123.js`, the script tag should be written as `<script src="blah123.js"></script>`. You get the idea.

## 3. Open the _.html_ file in the browser
After typing our Javascript program, we will want to test it. So we use the browser to run our script by opening the `.html` file that loads our script. Hence you can simply double-click on `hello.html` and your favorite browser should load the page.

You will see empty screen, and that's fine. We are really just interested in the content of the `console log`.

## 4. Open _console log_
Depending on your browser, this step will vary. I'll only describe it for Chrome browser.

The slowest way is to click on `View > Developer > Javascript Console`. Then click on the `Console` tab. You should see "Hello World!" printed (if not, you've messed up something somewhere).

Of course I advocate the faster (or fastest) way, which is to remember the shortcut. On OSX, it's `Command + Option + J`.

## 5. Repeat!
That's it for the workflow. You can always refer back to this page when you forget how.
